Section Movement Theory
=======================

If you've never used Vim's section movement commands (`[[`, `]]`, `[]`
and `][`) take a second and read the help for them now.  Go ahead and
read `:help section` as well.

Confused yet?  That's okay, so was I the first time I read that stuff.
We're going to take a quick detour from writing code to learn about how
these movements work, and then in the next chapter we'll make our Potion
plugin support them.

Nroff Files
-----------

The four "section movement" commands are conceptually meant to move
around between "sections" of a file.

All of these commands are designed to work with [nroff files][] by
default.  Nroff is a language like LaTeX or Markdown -- it's used to
write text that will be reformatted later (it's actually the format used
by UNIX man pages).

Nroff files use a certain set of "macros" to define "section headings".
For example, here's an excerpt from the `awk` man page:

    .SH NAME                                                     ***
    awk \- pattern-directed scanning and processing language
    .SH SYNOPSIS                                                 ***
    .B awk
    [
    .BI \-F
    .I fs
    ]
    [
    .BI \-v
    .I var=value
    ]
    [
    .I 'prog'
    |
    .BI \-f
    .I progfile
    ]
    [
    .I file ...
    ]
    .SH DESCRIPTION                                              ***
    .I Awk
    scans each input
    .I file
    for lines that match ...

The lines starting with `.SH` are section headings.  I've marked them
with `***`.  The four section movement commands will move your cursor
between these section heading lines.

Vim considers any line starting with `.` and one of the nroff heading
macros to be a section header, *even when you're not editing an nroff
file*!

You can change the macros by changing the `sections` setting, but Vim
still requires a period at the beginning of the line, and the macros
must be pairs of characters, so that setting doesn't add enough
flexibility for Potion files.

Braces
------

Section movement commands *also* look for one more thing: an opening or
closing curly brace (`{` or `}`) as the first character on a line.

`[[` and `]]` look for opening braces, while `[]` and `][` look for
closing braces.

This extra "hack" allows you to move between sections of C-like
languages easily.  However, these rules are always the same no matter
what type of file you're in!

Put the following into a buffer:

    Test           A B
    Test

    .SH Hello      A B

    Test

    {              A
    Test
    }                B

    Test

    .H World       A B

    Test
    Test           A B

Now run `:set filetype=basic` to tell Vim that this is a BASIC file, and
try the section movement comments.

The `[[` and `]]` commands will move between the lines marked `A`, while
`[]` and `][` move between the lines marked `B`.

This shows us that Vim always uses these same two rules for section
movement, even for languages where neither one makes sense (like BASIC)!

[nroff files]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nroff

From the help system
--------------------

### :help section

A section begins after a form-feed (`<C-L>`) in the first column and at
each of a set of section macros, specified by the pairs of characters in
the `'sections'` option.  The default is `"SHNHH HUnhsh"`, which defines
a section to start at the nroff macros `".SH"`, `".NH"`, `".H"`,
`".HU"`, `".nh"` and `".sh"`.

The `"]"` and `"["` commands stop at the `'{'` or `'}'` in the first
column.  This is useful to find the start or end of a function in a C
program.  Note that the first character of the command determines the
search direction and the second character the type of brace found.

If your `'{'` or `'}'` are not in the first column, and you would like
to use `"[["` and `"]]"` anyway, try these mappings:

   :map [[ ?{<CR>w99[{
   :map ][ /}<CR>b99]}
   :map ]] j0[[%/{<CR>
   :map [] k$][%?}<CR>

[type these literally, see `<>`]

### :help sections

`'sections' 'sect'    string    (default "SHNHH HUnhsh")` -- global
:   Specifies the nroff macros that separate sections.  These are pairs
    of two letters (See |object-motions|).  The default makes a section
    start at the nroff macros `".SH"`, `".NH"`, `".H"`, `".HU"`, `".nh"`
    and `".sh"`.
