Vim Help
========

Introduction
------------

Vim has such a diverse list of commands, keyboard shortcuts, buffers,
and so on. It’s impossible to remember how all of them work. In fact, it
is not even useful to know all of them. The best situation is that you
know how to look for certain functionality in Vim whenever you need it.

For example, you want to avoid having to type a long name every time,
you suddenly remember there is an abbreviations feature in Vim that’ll
help you do just that, but don’t remember how to use it. What do you do?

Let’s look at the various ways of finding help about how to use Vim.

The :help command
-----------------

The first and most important place to try to look for help is the
built-in documentation and Vim has one of the most comprehensive user
manuals that I’ve ever seen.

In our case, just run `:help abbreviation` and you’ll be taken to the
help for `abbreviations` and you can read about how to use the `:ab` and
`:iab` commands.

Sometimes, it can be as simple as that. If you don’t know what you’re
looking for, then you can run `:help user-manual` and browse through the
list of contents of the entire user manual and read the chapter that you
feel is relevant to what you’re trying to do.

How to read the :help topic
---------------------------

Let us take some sample text from `:help abbreviate`:


      :ab[breviate] [<expre>] {lhs} {rhs}
                   add abbreviation for {lhs} to {rhs}.  If {lhs} already
                   existed it is replaced with the new {rhs}.  {rhs} may
                   contain spaces.
                   See |:map-<expr>| for the optional  argument.


Notice that there is a standard way of writing help in Vim to make it
easy for us to figure out the parts that are needed for us instead of
trying to understand the whole command.

The first line explains the syntax, i.e., how to use this command.

The square brackets in `:ab[breviate]` indicate that the latter part of
the full name is optional. The minimum you have to type is `:ab` so that
Vim recognizes the command. You can also use `:abb` or `:abbr` or
`:abbre` and so on till the full name `:abbreviate`. Most people tend to
use the shortest form possible.

The square brackets in `[<expr>]` again indicate that the ‘expression’ is
optional.

The curly brackets in `{lhs} {rhs}` indicate that these are placeholders
for actual arguments to be supplied. The names are short for ‘left hand
side’ and ‘right hand side’ respectively.

Following the first line is an indented paragraph that briefly explains
what this command does.

Notice the second paragraph which points you to further information. You
can position the cursor on the text between the two pipe symbols and
press `ctrl-]` to follow the “link” to the corresponding `:help` topic.
To jump back, press `ctrl-o`.

The :helpgrep command
---------------------

If you do not know what the name of the topic is, then you can search
the entire documentation for a phrase by using `:helpgrep`. Suppose you
want to know how to look for the beginning of a word, then just run
`:helpgrep beginning of a word`.

You can use `:cnext` and `:cprev` to move to the next and previous part
of the documentation where that phrase occurs. Use `:clist` to see the
whole list of all the occurrences of the phrase.

Quick help
----------

Copy the following text into a file in Vim and then also run it:

    <span class="sy0">:</span>
    <span class="kw1">let</span>
    <span class="sy0">&amp;</span>keywordprg=<span
        class="st0">':help'</span>

Now, position your cursor anywhere on the word `keywordprg` and just press `K`. You’ll be taken to the help immediately for that word. This shortcut avoids having to type `:help keywordprg`.

Summary
-------

There is a wealth of information on how to do things using Vim, and many
Vimmers would gladly help you out as well. The Vim community is one of
the greatest strengths of the Vim editor, so make sure to use the
resources and do join the growing community as well.

> _The true delight is in the finding out rather than in the knowing._
>
> _Isaac Asimov_

* * *  
