Vim Installation
===================

Let’s see how to get Vim installed on your computer.

Windows
-------

If you use Microsoft Windows, then the following steps will help you get
the latest version of Vim 7 installed on your computer:

1. Visit <http://www.vim.org/download.php#pc>
2. Download the “Self-installing executable” (`gvim72.exe` as of this
   writing)
3. Double-click the file and install Vim like any other Windows-based
   software.

Mac OS X
--------

If you use Mac OS X, then you already have the terminal version of Vim
installed. Run the menu command Finder → Applications → Utilities →
Terminal. In the terminal, run the command `vim` and press enter, you
should now see the Vim welcome screen.

If you want to use a graphical version of Vim, download the latest
version of the Cocoa-based MacVim project. Double-click the file (such
as `MacVim-7_2-stable-1_2.tbz`), it will be unarchived and a directory
called `MacVim-7_2-stable-1_2` will be created. Open the directory, and
copy the `MacVim` app to your `Applications` directory.

For more details MacVim differences, including how to run MacVim from
the terminal see the macvim reference:

1. Click on Finder → Applications → MacVim.
2. Type `:help macvim` and press the Enter key.

Linux/BSD
---------

If you are using a Linux or \*BSD system, then you probably have at
least a minimal console version of Vim already installed. Open a
terminal program such as `konsole` or `gnome-terminal`, run `vim` and
you should see the Vim welcome screen.

If you get a message like `vim: command not found`, then Vim is not
installed. You will have to use your system-specific tools to install
Vim, such as `aptitude` in Ubuntu/Debian Linux, `yum` in Fedora Linux,
`pkg_add` or `port` in FreeBSD, etc. Please consult your specific
system’s documentation and forums on how to install new packages.

If you want the graphical version, install the `vim-gnome` package or
alternatively, the `gvim` package.

Summary
-------

Depending on how it is installed, you can run the `vim` command in the
shell or use your operating system’s menus to open a graphical version
of the `Vim` application.

Now that we have Vim installed on your computer, let us proceed to use
it in the next chapter.

* * *

